four little letters one big burly word
synonymous with high power engines and
Mopar vehicles for decades and resurgent
ly lately but what does it mean Hemi is
short for hemispherical okay why that's
a big deal to an engine makes for an
interesting story what better place to
tell the story of the Hemi than the most
famous place that ever built them up
Keith black racing engines here in LA
I can't so here we are legendary Keith
black racing engines how long's this
place been here since 1966 Keith black
Ken's father began building hot engines
for his and his friends race boats in
the late 50s Chrysler came calling in
1965 asking Keith to work over there 426
hemi z4 dragsters funny cars and boats
soon the Hemi engine was almost a
household word by the late 60s and early
70s Dodge Hemi Chargers and Plymouth
Hemi Cudas were becoming among the most
fabled American muscle cars and today
among the most valuable what do these
engines do that almost nothing else can
do oh it's just the amount of power you
can obtain from them because of the
design of the hemispherical combustion
chamber and Hemi comes from what what is
it refer to four hemispherical B the
terminology so what are we looking at
here this is what kind of a head this is
a wedge head this is basically a
conventional wedge type design head
notice how the intake and exhaust valves
line up but side by side across the
airflow in the combustion chamber in a
Hemi head they're opposite each other
and you can actually get larger valve
sizes in there the advantage this is the
cross flow of the intake to the exhaust
puts a bitter swirl on the mixture and
with the sparkplug being in the center
it fires off in the center of the
mixture which is right over the top of
the piston that gives it a better
question down in the cylinder boring
yeah so disadvantages well downside
looking for manufacturers viewpoint as
it takes a lot more to produce a Hindi
head and make it work than it would a
wedge it
this is the layout for the valve setup
your intake valves across here and
exhaust valves across here and because
they're opposing each other this way you
have to now be able to open and close
valves so now that accomplish that is be
pretty tough to have one shaft inner so
what they have and Chrysler did all this
stuff then the engineer did all is they
have a rocker stand set up and all that
apparatus makes for a wide head design
and a wider engine at a time when every
millimeter under the hood is valuable
real estate is it an efficient a fuel
efficient designers it more of a power
design it's boy if you talk about you
know still annoyed x' and everything
else I think it'd probably be in my
opinion more of a power do you know
efficiency this is making power the old
way right yeah yeah the old-school me
not yeah they don't use the same kind of
Pistons that other engines do no they're
unique to their own application because
of the hemispherical design of the
chamber for a high compression twelve
and a half to one you need a piston it
has more of a dome on it to be able to
compress it and it also form in the
shape of the chamber along with that
there's a little downside to a dome with
piston right yes they're a little bit
heavier quite a bit heavier yeah you see
this guy it's a big chunk of mount it's
big yeah and the problem being when you
have that if you're trying to make a
high-revving engine you've got to pull
this thing back every time I come to the
top of the stroke it's got to be pulled
back down by the rod again and it's a
lot of weight to keep pulling back so
for the modern engine maker is trying to
do a high rpm small narrow light engine
there are a number of things about a
traditional Hemi that doesn't really go
they're not there's not a desirable
feature you want a lighter weight piston
and you don't want to rev them a lot
higher so yeah no boring stuff so that
would not be conducive for what they're
trying to do now yeah this remains a
very specialized red-blooded American in
of course
you